Welcome to Anaesthesia Compendium. Today's viva station:
the principles of inhalational anaesthesia and minimum alveolar concentration.
I shall take the candidate through it, question by question. Let us begin.
Let us discuss the principles of inhalational anaesthesia and minimum alveolar
concentration. Begin with how an inhalational agent produces its effect.
An inhalational agent produces anaesthesia by establishing a partial pressure of
the agent in the brain sufficient to depress the central nervous system.
The agent is delivered to the alveoli, diffuses into the blood,
is carried to the brain and diffuses into it,
and at equilibrium the partial pressures in alveolus, blood and brain are equal.
It is the partial pressure, not the concentration,
that drives diffusion across each interface and that determines the depth of
anaesthesia, because partial pressure is what equilibrates.
The whole of inhalational pharmacokinetics is therefore concerned with how quickly
the alveolar partial pressure can be raised and transmitted to the brain,
and how quickly it can be removed, which is governed by the agent's solubility and
by ventilation and circulation.
What determines the alveolar concentration, and what is the FA over FI ratio?
The alveolar partial pressure is the pivot of the system,
since it equilibrates with the brain.
The ratio of alveolar to inspired concentration, written FA over FI,
describes how rapidly the alveolar concentration approaches the inspired
concentration, and its rate of rise determines the speed of induction.
The alveolar concentration is raised by delivery — the inspired concentration and
the alveolar ventilation washing agent in — and lowered by uptake of agent into the
blood. So the FA over FI curve rises quickly at first and then more slowly as
uptake falls.
Anything that increases delivery, such as a high inspired concentration or high
ventilation, speeds the rise; anything that increases uptake into the blood,
such as high solubility or high cardiac output, slows it.
Explain the factors that increase the rate of rise of alveolar concentration
through delivery.
Two delivery factors raise the alveolar concentration.
The inspired concentration: the higher the concentration delivered,
the faster the alveolar concentration rises,
which is the basis of the overpressure technique,
where a higher than maintenance concentration is given initially to speed induction
and then reduced.
Alveolar ventilation: increasing ventilation washes more agent into the alveoli per
unit time, raising the alveolar concentration more rapidly,
an effect more pronounced for soluble agents whose uptake would otherwise hold the
alveolar concentration down.
The functional residual capacity acts as a buffer that dilutes incoming agent,
so a smaller functional residual capacity, as in children or pregnancy,
speeds the rise.
So increasing inspired concentration and ventilation,
and a smaller functional residual capacity, all hasten induction.
Now the uptake side. How does blood solubility affect the speed of induction?
Blood solubility, expressed by the blood-gas partition coefficient,
is the dominant determinant of speed.
A soluble agent, with a high blood-gas coefficient,
is taken up avidly by the blood, which acts as a large reservoir that must be
filled before the alveolar partial pressure can rise,
so the alveolar concentration rises slowly and induction and recovery are slow.
An insoluble agent, with a low blood-gas coefficient, is taken up little,
so the blood partial pressure rises quickly to match the alveolar,
the alveolar concentration rises rapidly, and induction and recovery are fast.
This is why desflurane and nitrous oxide, with low coefficients,
give rapid control, while the more soluble older agents were slow.
Solubility is the single most important property governing the kinetics.
How do cardiac output and the alveolar-venous gradient affect uptake?
Cardiac output affects uptake because the blood flowing past the alveoli carries
agent away.
A high cardiac output removes agent from the alveoli more rapidly,
holding the alveolar concentration down and slowing the rise of alveolar partial
pressure, so paradoxically a high cardiac output slows inhalational induction,
an effect most marked for soluble agents.
A low cardiac output, as in shock, speeds the rise and can hasten and deepen
induction dangerously.
The alveolar-to-venous partial-pressure gradient drives uptake:
early on the gradient is large and uptake high,
but as the tissues fill and the venous blood returns with a higher partial
pressure, the gradient and uptake fall, which is why the FA over FI curve flattens.
So uptake depends on solubility, cardiac output and the gradient together.
Describe the concentration effect and the second-gas effect.
These are effects seen when a gas is given in high concentration,
classically nitrous oxide.
The concentration effect is that the higher the inspired concentration of a gas,
the faster its alveolar concentration approaches the inspired concentration —
because as large volumes of the gas are taken up,
the resulting reduction in alveolar volume concentrates the remaining gas and draws
in more fresh gas.
The second-gas effect follows: when a high concentration of nitrous oxide is given
alongside a volatile agent, the large uptake of nitrous oxide concentrates and
accelerates the uptake of the second gas,
speeding the rise of its alveolar concentration and hastening induction.
So a high concentration of nitrous oxide speeds the onset of a co-administered
volatile agent.
What is diffusion hypoxia, and how is it prevented?
Diffusion hypoxia occurs at the end of a nitrous-oxide anaesthetic.
Because nitrous oxide is relatively insoluble and has been given in high
concentration, large volumes of it diffuse rapidly out of the blood into the
alveoli when it is discontinued, diluting the alveolar gas, including oxygen,
and lowering the alveolar partial pressure of oxygen — and of carbon dioxide,
which reduces respiratory drive.
The result can be arterial hypoxaemia in the first few minutes of recovery.
It is prevented simply by administering a high concentration of oxygen,
often one hundred per cent, for the first several minutes after discontinuing
nitrous oxide, which maintains the alveolar oxygen and prevents the hypoxaemia.
It is the mirror image of the concentration effect at offset.
Define minimum alveolar concentration.
The minimum alveolar concentration, or MAC,
of a volatile agent is the alveolar concentration,
at equilibrium and at one atmosphere,
that prevents movement in response to a standard surgical skin incision in fifty
per cent of subjects.
It is therefore a measure of potency: the lower the minimum alveolar concentration,
the more potent the agent.
It is an alveolar, and so an effect-site, concentration,
since the alveolar partial pressure equilibrates with the brain,
which makes it a useful, measurable index of anaesthetic depth that can be
monitored at the end of the breathing system.
Because it is defined at equilibrium and in standard conditions,
it provides a common currency for comparing the potency of different agents and for
guiding their administration.
Why fifty per cent, and what are the MAC derivatives?
Fifty per cent is chosen because it is the median,
the point of the steepest and most reproducible part of the dose-response curve,
giving a stable, statistically robust reference;
it does not mean half the patients are awake.
Clinically we aim above one minimum alveolar concentration to ensure almost all
patients do not move.
Several derivatives describe other end-points: MAC-awake, around a third of MAC,
is the concentration at which half of subjects open their eyes on emergence,
relevant to awareness; MAC-BAR, around one-and-a-half MAC,
blocks the adrenergic response to incision in half of subjects;
and the concentration to prevent movement at intubation is higher than for incision.
These derivatives express that different end-points — immobility, awareness,
autonomic response — occur at different fractions of MAC.
What factors increase the minimum alveolar concentration?
MAC is increased — meaning more agent is needed — by factors that raise central
excitability or anaesthetic requirement. Youth raises MAC,
which peaks in infancy and declines with age. Hyperthermia raises it.
Chronic alcohol and chronic use of central stimulants raise it through tolerance
and increased central activity, as do acute amfetamine and cocaine and other
sympathomimetics. Hypernatraemia raises it.
Drugs that increase central catecholamines raise it.
Red hair has been associated with a modestly higher requirement.
So conditions of increased central excitability, tolerance,
and certain physiological states raise the requirement for volatile agent.
And the factors that decrease it?
MAC is decreased — less agent needed — by many common factors.
Increasing age lowers it progressively. Hypothermia lowers it substantially.
Pregnancy lowers it, through progesterone.
Co-administered central depressants lower it markedly — opioids, benzodiazepines,
other anaesthetics, and the alpha-two agonists such as clonidine and
dexmedetomidine — which is the basis of balanced anaesthesia.
Acute alcohol intoxication lowers it.
Hyponatraemia, severe hypoxaemia and severe hypercarbia,
severe hypotension and anaemia lower it. Lithium lowers it.
So the elderly, the pregnant, the hypothermic and the sedated patient need less
volatile agent, which must be allowed for to avoid overdose and excessive
cardiovascular depression.
Is MAC additive between agents?
Yes — the minimum alveolar concentrations of different inhalational agents given
together are approximately additive.
So if a patient receives nitrous oxide at, say,
half its minimum alveolar concentration together with a volatile agent at half its
minimum alveolar concentration, the combination provides approximately one minimum
alveolar concentration of anaesthesia.
This additivity is exploited in practice by combining nitrous oxide with a volatile
agent, allowing a lower concentration of the volatile and so reducing its
cardiovascular depression, while the nitrous oxide also speeds the onset through
the second-gas effect and contributes analgesia.
The additivity of MAC is therefore a practically useful principle underlying common
inhalational technique.
Relate MAC to lipid solubility through the Meyer-Overton correlation.
The minimum alveolar concentration correlates inversely and closely with lipid
solubility, measured by the oil-gas partition coefficient — the more lipid-soluble
the agent, the lower its minimum alveolar concentration and the greater its potency.
This is the Meyer-Overton correlation,
and the product of MAC and the oil-gas coefficient is roughly constant across
agents.
Historically this suggested anaesthesia arose from a non-specific disturbance of
the lipid membrane, but that unitary lipid theory is now regarded as too simple,
since anaesthesia is better explained by actions on specific protein targets such
as the gamma-aminobutyric acid and other channels,
and there are exceptions to the correlation.
Nonetheless the relationship remains a striking link between a physicochemical
property, lipid solubility, and a pharmacological one, potency.
List the properties of the ideal inhalational agent.
The ideal agent would have physical properties allowing stable storage and easy
vaporisation, with no flammability and a long shelf-life.
Pharmacokinetically it would have low blood and tissue solubility for rapid onset
and offset and precise control.
Pharmacodynamically it would be potent, with a low minimum alveolar concentration,
provide anaesthesia, analgesia and some muscle relaxation,
and be free of significant cardiovascular, respiratory, hepatic and renal toxicity.
It would not be metabolised to toxic products,
would not trigger malignant hyperthermia, would not irritate the airway,
would be pleasant for inhalational induction,
and would be cheap and environmentally benign.
No agent meets all of these, so each is a compromise,
and the properties of the available agents are best understood as approximations to
this ideal.
How does the distribution of agent to the tissues proceed after the alveolar
concentration rises?
Once the agent is in the arterial blood it is distributed to the tissues in
proportion to their blood flow and their capacity for the agent.
The vessel-rich group — brain, heart, liver,
kidneys — receives the great majority of the cardiac output and equilibrates first,
within minutes, which is why the brain partial pressure follows the alveolar so
closely and anaesthesia is rapidly established.
Muscle, with lower flow and large capacity,
equilibrates over a longer period and acts as a reservoir.
Fat, with low flow but enormous capacity for these lipophilic agents,
fills slowly over hours and continues to take up agent throughout a long
anaesthetic, contributing to a slower offset after prolonged exposure.
So the tissue groups fill in sequence according to flow and capacity.
Why is recovery from a volatile anaesthetic relatively independent of the duration
for the insoluble agents?
Recovery occurs by washout of the agent from the brain and blood through
ventilation, the reverse of induction,
and its speed is governed by the same factor of solubility.
For an insoluble agent such as desflurane,
little is taken up into the slowly equilibrating tissue reservoirs and what is
there is released quickly, so the alveolar and brain partial pressures fall rapidly
when the agent is discontinued, and recovery is fast and relatively independent of
the duration of anaesthesia.
For a more soluble agent, the large amount accumulated in muscle and fat during a
long anaesthetic is released slowly,
so recovery is slower and more dependent on duration.
So the low-solubility agents give the most rapid and duration-independent recovery,
which is a major practical advantage.
How do right-to-left and left-to-right shunts affect inhalational induction?
A right-to-left shunt, in which venous blood bypasses the alveoli,
slows the rise of arterial partial pressure,
because some blood reaches the arterial side without having taken up agent,
diluting the arterial partial pressure;
the effect is more pronounced for insoluble agents,
whose alveolar uptake is normally so complete that the bypassed blood makes a
relatively greater difference.
A left-to-right shunt, recirculating already-oxygenated blood,
has little effect on induction unless it reduces tissue perfusion.
So a significant right-to-left shunt, as in cyanotic heart disease,
slows inhalational induction, particularly with the insoluble agents on which we
usually rely for speed, which is worth anticipating in such patients.
Pull it together: how do these principles guide your conduct of an inhalational
anaesthetic?
They let me predict and control the depth of anaesthesia.
I choose an agent of low solubility for rapid,
controllable onset and offset and for duration-independent recovery,
and I use the second-gas effect of nitrous oxide and the overpressure technique to
speed induction.
I monitor the end-tidal, alveolar concentration as a guide to brain partial
pressure and depth, aiming above one minimum alveolar concentration adjusted for
the patient.
I allow for the factors that reduce the requirement — age, pregnancy,
hypothermia and co-administered opioids and sedatives — reducing the delivered
concentration accordingly, and for those that increase it.
I anticipate slower control in the high-output and the shunted patient, and faster,
deeper effect in the low-output patient,
and I prevent diffusion hypoxia with oxygen at the end.
The principles thus translate directly into safe, controlled administration.
Explain the concept of a time constant in the wash-in of an agent.
A time constant is the volume of a compartment divided by the flow through it,
and it describes the time course of filling:
after one time constant a compartment is about sixty-three per cent equilibrated,
after two about eighty-six, and after three about ninety-five per cent.
Applied to inhalational uptake, the alveolar wash-in and the filling of each tissue
group follow an exponential approach to equilibrium characterised by their time
constants.
The lungs have a short time constant and fill quickly;
the vessel-rich tissues equilibrate in minutes; muscle over an hour or more;
and fat over many hours.
Thinking in time constants explains the multi-exponential shape of both wash-in and
washout and why a brief anaesthetic recovers faster than a prolonged one.
Describe the phases of the FA over FI curve.
The curve has a characteristic shape with an initial steep rise followed by
progressively slower phases. The first,
rapid phase reflects the wash-in of the functional residual capacity by
ventilation, raising the alveolar concentration quickly towards the inspired.
The curve then enters a slower phase as uptake into the blood and the vessel-rich
tissues removes agent from the alveoli, holding the alveolar concentration down;
this phase is dominated by solubility and cardiac output.
A still slower phase follows as the muscle and finally the fat compartments take up
agent over hours. The knee of the curve, where it flattens,
marks the point at which the vessel-rich group has equilibrated.
The whole shape is the visible result of the sequential filling of compartments
with different time constants.
How do changes in functional residual capacity affect induction,
with clinical examples?
The functional residual capacity buffers the incoming agent,
so a smaller functional residual capacity relative to ventilation means the
alveolar concentration rises more quickly.
Children have a high ratio of alveolar ventilation to functional residual capacity,
so inhalational induction is faster in them, which is clinically obvious.
Pregnancy reduces the functional residual capacity and increases ventilation,
again speeding induction and reducing the agent requirement.
Obesity reduces the functional residual capacity.
Conversely, conditions increasing the functional residual capacity,
or reducing ventilation, slow the rise.
So the relationship between ventilation and functional residual capacity is a real
determinant of the speed of inhalational induction,
fastest where ventilation is high relative to a small lung volume.
Work through the concentration effect quantitatively for nitrous oxide.
The concentration effect arises because nitrous oxide is given in such high
concentration that its bulk uptake affects the gas volumes.
Suppose a high concentration of nitrous oxide is inspired and a large fraction of
it is taken up into the blood; the volume of gas in the alveolus falls as the
nitrous oxide leaves, which concentrates the remaining gas and,
by reducing alveolar volume, draws in more fresh gas to replace it.
Both effects raise the alveolar concentration of the nitrous oxide faster than
uptake alone would predict, so its alveolar concentration approaches the inspired
concentration more quickly the higher the inspired concentration.
This same bulk uptake is what drives the second-gas effect on a co-administered
volatile and, in reverse at offset, diffusion hypoxia.
Why does volatile agent accumulate so little compared with an intravenous agent
like propofol?
The comparison is really about how the drug is delivered and removed.
A volatile agent is continuously delivered to and removed from the body through the
lungs, so when it is discontinued, ventilation washes it out down the same
gradient, and for an insoluble agent this washout is rapid and largely independent
of duration.
The tissue reservoirs, especially fat,
do accumulate soluble agent over a long anaesthetic and prolong the offset,
but the lung provides an efficient, immediate route of elimination.
The key point is that the alveolar partial pressure can be controlled breath by
breath, giving volatiles a controllability that intravenous agents,
dependent on metabolism and redistribution for offset, lack.
This is why end-tidal monitoring allows such precise titration of depth.
How is minimum alveolar concentration actually measured?
It is measured experimentally by establishing a steady end-tidal concentration of
the agent, applying a standard supramaximal stimulus — classically a surgical skin
incision — and recording whether the subject moves,
then determining across many subjects the concentration at which half move and half
do not.
The up-and-down, or Dixon, method is used:
the concentration for each subject is set higher or lower than the previous one
according to whether that subject moved,
and the minimum alveolar concentration is derived from the crossover points.
The concentration is allowed to reach equilibrium before the stimulus,
since it is the equilibrated alveolar and so brain partial pressure that matters.
This rigorous methodology is why minimum alveolar concentration is a robust,
reproducible measure of potency.
Quantify the effect of age on minimum alveolar concentration.
Minimum alveolar concentration varies with age in a well-described way.
It is highest in infancy — around six months of age — and is somewhat lower in the
neonate.
From infancy it declines progressively with increasing age,
by roughly six per cent per decade of adult life,
so that an elderly patient requires substantially less agent than a young adult for
the same effect.
This is a clinically important relationship,
because failing to reduce the delivered concentration in the elderly risks
overdose, excessive cardiovascular depression and delayed recovery,
while in the young child a higher concentration is needed.
So I would adjust the target end-tidal concentration to the patient's age,
reducing it in the elderly and increasing it in the young.
Distinguish the oil-gas, blood-gas and Ostwald solubility coefficients.
These coefficients describe how an agent partitions between phases at equilibrium.
The blood-gas partition coefficient is the ratio of the agent's concentration in
blood to that in the gas phase at equilibrium and governs the speed of onset and
offset — a low value gives rapid control.
The oil-gas partition coefficient is the ratio between oil and gas,
an index of lipid solubility, and correlates with potency through the Meyer-Overton
relationship — a high value means a potent agent with a low minimum alveolar
concentration.
The Ostwald solubility coefficient is the general term for the volume of gas
dissolved in a unit volume of liquid at a given temperature,
of which the blood-gas coefficient is a specific example.
So blood-gas predicts speed, oil-gas predicts potency.
What happens to minimum alveolar concentration at altitude or under hyperbaric
conditions?
Here the distinction between concentration and partial pressure is crucial.
The anaesthetising condition is a particular partial pressure of agent in the
brain, and that partial pressure, not the volumes-percent concentration,
is fixed for a given depth of anaesthesia.
At altitude, where atmospheric pressure is low,
the same partial pressure corresponds to a higher volumes-percent concentration,
so the minimum alveolar concentration expressed as a percentage rises,
although the partial pressure required is unchanged;
a vaporiser delivering a set percentage delivers a lower partial pressure.
Under hyperbaric conditions the converse holds.
So minimum alveolar concentration is properly a partial pressure;
expressing it as a percentage is only valid at one atmosphere,
and at altitude or pressure the percentage must be reinterpreted in terms of
partial pressure.
How does a right-to-left shunt's effect differ between soluble and insoluble agents?
A right-to-left shunt allows venous blood to reach the arterial side without
passing the alveoli, diluting the arterial partial pressure and slowing induction.
The effect is greater for insoluble agents.
This is because, for an insoluble agent,
the alveolar partial pressure normally rises very rapidly to near the inspired,
so the shunted, agent-free blood makes a proportionally large difference to the
arterial partial pressure; for a soluble agent,
whose alveolar partial pressure rises slowly anyway,
the additional dilution from the shunt is relatively less significant.
So a significant right-to-left shunt blunts the speed advantage of the insoluble
agents on which we usually rely, which is worth bearing in mind in cyanotic
congenital heart disease.
How do you use end-tidal monitoring,
and what are its limitations as a measure of depth?
The end-tidal concentration of the agent approximates the alveolar partial pressure
and so the brain partial pressure, allowing me to titrate to a chosen fraction of
minimum alveolar concentration, adjusted for the patient and for co-administered
drugs, as a guide to depth.
Its limitations are several: it reflects the volatile agent only,
not the contribution of intravenous agents or nitrous oxide unless these are
accounted for; the relationship to a particular patient's requirement varies with
all the factors that alter minimum alveolar concentration;
and it indicates immobility rather than directly measuring awareness or analgesia.
Processed electroencephalographic monitors give complementary information about
cortical depression. So end-tidal monitoring is a valuable, practical guide,
best combined with awareness of the patient's individual requirement and,
where indicated, depth-of-anaesthesia monitoring.
Summarise the features that make an inhalational agent fast in onset and offset.
An agent gives rapid onset and offset chiefly through low solubility — a low
blood-gas partition coefficient — so that the blood reservoir is filled quickly and
the alveolar partial pressure rises and falls rapidly.
Low tissue solubility, particularly low fat solubility,
makes the offset rapid and independent of duration by limiting accumulation.
High alveolar ventilation and a small functional residual capacity speed the
wash-in, and a low cardiac output, though not desirable, speeds it too.
Use of the concentration and second-gas effects and the overpressure technique
hastens onset further.
Conversely a high cardiac output and a right-to-left shunt slow it.
So the prototype of a fast agent is desflurane:
very low blood and tissue solubility giving rapid, controllable,
duration-independent kinetics.
How does the second-gas effect shorten induction in practice?
In practice, when a high concentration of nitrous oxide is administered together
with a volatile agent at the start of anaesthesia,
the large and rapid uptake of nitrous oxide into the blood produces the
concentration effect on itself and,
by reducing alveolar volume and drawing in fresh gas,
concentrates and accelerates the uptake of the volatile agent given with it.
The alveolar concentration of the volatile therefore rises faster than it would
alone, shortening the time to an anaesthetising partial pressure in the brain.
This is one of the practical reasons nitrous oxide has been used as a carrier
alongside a volatile agent, the others being its additive contribution to minimum
alveolar concentration and its analgesia,
allowing a lower concentration of the volatile and so less cardiovascular
depression.
Pull together how solubility governs the whole clinical behaviour of an agent.
Solubility is the master variable.
A low blood-gas solubility means little uptake into the blood reservoir,
so the alveolar and brain partial pressures rise and fall rapidly,
giving fast induction, fast emergence,
and precise breath-by-breath control of depth;
low tissue and fat solubility make the offset rapid and independent of duration.
A high solubility means avid uptake, a large reservoir to fill, slow rise and fall,
and accumulation in fat that prolongs recovery after long anaesthesia.
The high-output patient suffers a further slowing with soluble agents,
the low-output patient a dangerous speeding.
So from a single physical property I can predict the speed,
controllability and duration-dependence of an agent's behaviour,
which is why solubility, expressed as the blood-gas coefficient,
is the first thing I consider about any inhalational agent.
Quantify how opioids reduce the minimum alveolar concentration,
and note the ceiling.
Opioids reduce the minimum alveolar concentration of volatile agents substantially
— a moderate dose can reduce it by half or more — which is the basis of balanced
anaesthesia, allowing a lower, less cardiovascularly depressant concentration of
volatile agent.
The reduction is, however, not limitless: the relationship plateaus,
so that beyond a certain opioid dose little further reduction in minimum alveolar
concentration is achieved, a ceiling to the synergy.
The practical implication is that opioids markedly spare the volatile requirement
and blunt the response to stimulation,
but they cannot abolish the need for a hypnotic component,
and relying on a very high opioid dose to permit a very low volatile concentration
risks awareness.
So opioids reduce but do not eliminate the volatile requirement,
and the hypnotic must remain adequate.
What is MAC-awake, and how does it relate to awareness?
MAC-awake is the alveolar concentration at which half of subjects respond
appropriately to command, or open their eyes,
on emergence — roughly a third of the minimum alveolar concentration for movement.
It is relevant to awareness because it marks the concentration around which
consciousness returns.
Maintaining the agent comfortably above MAC-awake helps prevent awareness,
while allowing it to fall towards MAC-awake,
as at the end of surgery or if the agent is reduced too far in a balanced
technique, brings the risk of consciousness.
The concept reminds me that immobility,
achieved at one minimum alveolar concentration, and unconsciousness,
lost around MAC-awake, occur at different concentrations,
and that a paralysed patient who cannot move could still be aware if the hypnotic
component is allowed to fall too low.
Describe the washout of agent at the end of anaesthesia in terms of the tissue
compartments.
At the end of anaesthesia, when the agent is discontinued and the patient
ventilated with fresh gas, the partial-pressure gradient reverses and agent moves
from the tissues back to the blood and out through the lungs.
The vessel-rich tissues, which equilibrated first,
give up their agent first and quickly. Muscle releases its accumulated agent more
slowly over a longer period.
Fat, which filled slowly and may not have equilibrated even after a long
anaesthetic, releases its large store very slowly,
sustaining a low partial pressure that prolongs the terminal phase,
particularly for soluble agents after prolonged anaesthesia.
For an insoluble agent little is stored, so washout is rapid and recovery quick.
So the offset mirrors the onset, governed by the same compartments and the same
dominance of solubility.
How do hypothermia and acute physiological disturbances affect both minimum
alveolar concentration and kinetics?
Hypothermia reduces the minimum alveolar concentration,
lowering the anaesthetic requirement,
and it also alters kinetics by increasing the solubility of agents in blood and
tissues, which slows their wash-in and wash-out, and by reducing metabolism.
So a cold patient needs less agent and changes more slowly.
Other acute disturbances also matter:
a low cardiac output speeds the rise of alveolar concentration and can deepen
anaesthesia dangerously, while a high output slows it; severe hypotension,
hypoxaemia and anaemia lower the requirement.
The clinical lesson is to reduce the delivered concentration and titrate carefully
in the cold, the shocked and the physiologically disturbed patient,
in whom both a lower requirement and altered kinetics conspire to make a standard
concentration an overdose.
Why is partial pressure, rather than concentration,
the quantity that equilibrates across the system?
Because diffusion is driven by differences in partial pressure, not concentration,
and at equilibrium it is the partial pressures, not the concentrations,
that become equal across the alveolus, blood and brain.
A given partial pressure of agent corresponds to very different concentrations in
gas, blood and tissue according to each phase's solubility — a soluble agent
reaches a high blood concentration at the same partial pressure — but it is the
partial pressure that determines the net movement and the effect at the receptor.
This is why the alveolar partial pressure,
which we approximate by the end-tidal concentration,
is a valid index of the brain partial pressure and so of depth,
and why minimum alveolar concentration is properly a partial pressure.
Thinking in partial pressures, not concentrations,
is the key to understanding inhalational pharmacokinetics.
How does obesity influence inhalational technique and agent choice?
Obesity influences inhalational anaesthesia in several ways.
The functional residual capacity is reduced,
which speeds the alveolar wash-in but also reduces the oxygen reserve and the
margin during apnoea.
The large fat mass provides a vast reservoir for lipophilic agents,
so soluble agents accumulate over a long anaesthetic and recovery is prolonged.
For these reasons the least soluble agent, desflurane,
with its low fat solubility and rapid, duration-independent washout,
has been favoured in the obese to ensure a prompt,
clear-headed recovery with early return of airway reflexes,
important in a group at risk of airway obstruction and hypoxaemia after surgery.
Sevoflurane is also suitable. So in obesity I would prefer a low-solubility agent,
mindful of the reduced reserve and the value of rapid emergence,
while weighing desflurane's environmental cost.
State the relationship between potency and the oil-gas coefficient one more time,
with the agents ranked.
Potency, expressed inversely by the minimum alveolar concentration,
correlates with lipid solubility measured by the oil-gas partition coefficient,
so the rank order of potency follows the rank order of lipid solubility.
Among the agents, halothane is the most potent,
with the lowest minimum alveolar concentration around zero-point-seven-five per
cent; isoflurane next at around one-point-two per cent;
sevoflurane around two per cent; desflurane the least potent at around six per
cent; and nitrous oxide the least potent of all at around one hundred and four per
cent, so that it cannot reach one minimum alveolar concentration at one atmosphere.
The product of minimum alveolar concentration and the oil-gas coefficient is
roughly constant, the quantitative expression of the Meyer-Overton correlation
linking potency to lipid solubility.
How does the additivity of minimum alveolar concentration guide a
nitrous-oxide-and-volatile technique?
Because the minimum alveolar concentrations of agents given together add,
I can use nitrous oxide to provide part of the anaesthetic requirement and so
reduce the concentration of volatile agent needed.
Delivering nitrous oxide at, say, around sixty per cent contributes a substantial
fraction of one minimum alveolar concentration,
allowing the volatile to be run at a correspondingly lower concentration to reach
the desired total, which reduces the volatile's cardiovascular depression and
speeds onset through the second-gas effect, while the nitrous oxide adds analgesia.
The trade-offs are the limits on inspired oxygen imposed by a high nitrous
concentration, the expansion of air-filled spaces, the risk of diffusion hypoxia,
and the environmental and vitamin-B-twelve concerns of nitrous oxide.
So additivity is exploited to lower the volatile dose,
balanced against the drawbacks of nitrous oxide.
Summarise how the principles of uptake and minimum alveolar concentration together
let you control anaesthetic depth.
Together they give me both the speed and the level of anaesthesia.
The uptake principles — dominated by blood and tissue solubility,
modified by ventilation, cardiac output,
the concentration and second-gas effects and shunt — tell me how quickly I can
change the alveolar and so the brain partial pressure,
letting me choose a low-solubility agent and techniques to speed onset and offset
and to control depth breath by breath.
The minimum alveolar concentration,
adjusted for the patient's age and the many factors that raise or lower it and for
co-administered opioids, tells me the level to aim for,
monitored as end-tidal concentration.
Combining a kinetically controllable agent with a target expressed in fractions of
an individualised minimum alveolar concentration is what allows precise,
safe titration of inhalational anaesthesia.
Thank you. A clear and complete account. Let us stop there.
Before we close, here are the take-home messages.
First, Partial pressure, not concentration, drives diffusion and determines depth;
the alveolar partial pressure equilibrates with the brain,
so the rate of rise of FA/FI sets the speed of induction.
Second, Blood-gas solubility is the dominant kinetic factor:
low solubility (desflurane, nitrous oxide) gives rapid, controllable,
duration-independent onset and offset;
high cardiac output slows the rise of soluble agents.
Third, MAC is the alveolar concentration preventing movement to skin incision in
50% — an index of potency that correlates inversely with lipid solubility
(Meyer-Overton); MAC values of co-administered agents are additive.
Fourth, MAC is raised by youth, hyperthermia, chronic alcohol and stimulants;
lowered by age, pregnancy, hypothermia, acute alcohol, and co-administered opioids,
sedatives and alpha-2 agonists — the basis of balanced anaesthesia.
Fifth, Remember the concentration and second-gas effects (high nitrous speeds a
co-given volatile), diffusion hypoxia at offset (give oxygen),
and the slowing of insoluble-agent induction by a right-to-left shunt.
Thank you. That concludes the station.